# PQ SDK Test Framework - Test Suites

The PQ SDK Test Framework consists of prebuilt test suite to easily validate any extension connectors. The test framework is built to run tests in PQ/PQOut format using the `pqtest.exe compare` command. Please review the documentation in [PQTest docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/power-query/sdk-tools/pqtest-overview) to learn more about running tests with PQTest.exe in PQ/PQOut format.

The test framework consists of the following:

**TestSuites folder**: This folder contains all the pre-built tests for testing a connector. This folder contains two sets of tests present under Sanity & Standard folders:
- **Sanity folder**: The sanity tests validate that the tests are able to connect to the data source and the test tables with correct schema exist in the datasource. There are also tests that validate the rowcount and data of NYCTaxiGreen and TaxiZoneLookup tables in the datasource.
- **Standard folder**: The standard sets contain various tests that need to validate the connector. There are tests to test all the datatypes, Math, Date, Time, Text functions and operators. There are tests to validate joins between two tables as well.

**ConnectorConfigs folder**: This folder contains a folder with the connector name for connector to be tested which contains ParameterQueries & Settings. Samples are provided for a generic connector.
  - **ParameterQueries folder:** It will be present under a folder with the connector name and contains the parameter query file(s) which are M queries to connect to the data source and retrieve the NycTaxiGreen & TaxiZoneLookup tables.
  - **Settings folder:** It contains folders with the name of the data source extension connectors where the test folder and the parameter query file locations are specified.

**RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1:** This script will execute all PQ/PQOut tests present in the Sanity & Standard folders and generate the results.

**RunPQSDKTestSuitesSettings.json:** This json file can be used to provide all the arguments that can be passed to RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1.

**RunPQSDKTestSuitesSettingsTemplate.json:** This json file contains all the arguments that you can set in `RunPQSDKTestSuitesSettings.json` file.

## Initial Setup

To ensure that you can run these pre-built tests, the below pre-requisites must be completed before running the tests:

- Clone the DataConnectors repo.
- Load the provided test data in the data source.
- Set the PQTest.exe and Extension paths in the RunPQSDKTestSuitesSettings.json file.
- Update parameter queries and settings file with the details specific to your data source extension connector.
- Set the credentials for your extension connector.
- Validate the test data is setup correctly by running the Sanity Tests.

### Clone the DataConnectors repo:

Clone the [DataConnectors repo](https://github.com/microsoft/DataConnectors). Refer the
[DataConnectors README](https://github.com/microsoft/DataConnectors/blob/master/README.md) for information
on Custom Connectors built with the Power Query SDK.

### Test Data Loading:

The test data is provided in the form of csv along with the schema defintion. This should be loaded as `NycTaxiGreen` and `TaxiZoneLookup` tables to your data source ensuring that the schema corresponds to the datatypes defined in your data source. Refer to `testframework\data\PQSDKTestData.md` for further information.

### Set the PQTest.exe and Extension paths in the RunPQSDKTestSuitesSettings.json file:

- Navigate to the `testframework\tests` and open the the `RunPQSDKTestSuitesSettings.json` file in cloned repo folder and set the following values:

  ```
  // Set the paths for PQTest.exe wand Extension in the config
  "PQTestExePath":"<Replace with the path to PQTest.exe. Ex: 'C:\\Users\\ContosoUser\\.vscode\\extensions\\powerquery.vscode-powerquery-sdk-0.2.3-win32-x64\\.nuget\\Microsoft.PowerQuery.SdkTools.2.114.4\\tools\\PQTest.exe'>",
  $Extension = "<Replace with path to the extension mez file Ex: C:\\dev\\ConnectorName\\ConnectorName.mez'>"
  ```

  Note: You can find further information about all the variables that you can set in `RunPQSDKTestSuitesSettings.json` file in the template `testframework\tests\RunPQSDKTestSuitesSettingsTemplate.json` provided.

### Update parameter queries and settings file with the details specific to your data source extension connector:

- Running the powershell script `.\RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1` will create the parameter queries and test Settings by creating a folder with the `<extension name>` and `Settings` & `ParameterQueries` folders under it.
  ```
  - testframework\tests\ConnectorConfigs\<Extension Name>\ParameterQueries
  - testframework\tests\ConnectorConfigs\<Extension Name>\Settings

  Ex: For an connector named Contoso the paths will be as below:
  - testframework\tests\TestSuites\Contoso\ParameterQueries
  - testframework\tests\TestSuites\Contoso\Settings
  ```
  Note: Please update the parameter query file(s) generated by replacing with the M query to connect to your data source and retrieve the NycTaxiGreen & TaxiZoneLookup tables.

- Alternatively, to manually create the parameter query file(s) and settings file(s) for your data source perform the below steps:

  - Navigate to the folder under the cloned repo folder: `testframework\tests\ConnectorConfigs`
  - Make a copy of the "generic" folder and rename it to the extension name
  - Open each file under the `ParameterQuries` folder and update the M queries as the instructions provided in the file
  - Open each file under the `Settings` folder and update the settings file to point to the correct parameter query file

### Set the credentials for your extension connector:

- Ensure the credentials are setup for your connector following the instructions here: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/power-query/power-query-sdk-vs-code#set-credential
- Alternatively, use this `credential-template` command to generate a credential template in json format for your connector that can be passed into the `set-credential` command.

  ```
  <Path to PQText.exe> credential-template -e <Path to Extension.exe> -q "<Replace with path to any parameter query file>" --prettyPrint --authenticationKind <Specify the authentication kind (Anonymous, UsernamePassword, Key, Windows, OAuth2)>

  Example:
  C:\Users\ContosoUser\.vscode\extensions\powerquery.vscode-powerquery-sdk-0.2.3-win32-x64\.nuget\Microsoft.PowerQuery.SdkTools.2.114.4\tools\PQTest.exe credential-template -e "C:\dev\Contoso\Contoso.mez" -q "C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites\ParameterQueries\Contoso\Contoso.parameterquery.pq" --prettyPrint --authenticationKind UsernamePassword
  ```

  Take the output from the above command and replace the Username and Password values with correct credentials and save  it as json file (Ex: contoso_cred.json).

- Then, use this `set-credential` command store credentials that will be used by the `compare` commands to run the tests. Using the existing powershell window, set the credentials for your extension using the json credential file generated in the previous step. Refer the [PQTest docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/power-query/sdk-tools/pqtest-overview) to learn more about the usage of `credential-template` and `set-credential` to set up the credentials for your connector.

  ```
  Get-Content "<Replace with path to the json credential file>" | & $PQTestExe set-credential -e "$Extension" -q "<Replace with the path to any parameter query file>

  Example:
  Get-Content "C:\dev\Misc\contoso_cred.json" | C:\Users\ContosoUser\.vscode\extensions\powerquery.vscode-powerquery-sdk-0.2.3-win32-x64\.nuget\Microsoft.PowerQuery.SdkTools.2.114.4\tools\PQTest.exe  set-credential -p -e "$Extension" -q "C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites\Contoso\ParameterQueries\Contoso.parameterquery.pq"

  ```

### Validate the test data is setup correctly by running the Sanity Tests:

To ensure that the changes are working and the data setup is done correctly, run Sanity Tests as below:

- Run the Sanity Tests using the below commands:

```
# Run the Sanity Tests
.\RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1 -TestSettingsList SanitySettings.json

Example:
PS C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites> .\RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1 -TestSettingsList SanitySettings.json

# Output
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PQ SDK Test Framework - Test Execution - Test Results Summary for Extension: Contoso.pqx
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

TestFolder  TestName                        OutputStatus TestStatus Duration
----------  --------                        ------------ ---------- --------
Sanity\Taxi AllTypes.query.pq                          Passed     00:00:00.0227976
Sanity\Taxi AllTypesRowCount.query.pq                  Passed     00:00:00.0001734
Sanity\Taxi AllTypesSchema.query.pq                    Passed     00:00:00.0001085
Sanity\Zone AllTypesZone.query.pq                      Passed     00:00:00.0010058
Sanity\Zone AllTypesZoneRowCount.query.pq              Passed     00:00:00.0001786
Sanity\Zone AllTypesZoneSchema.query.pq                Passed     00:00:00.0000920

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Tests: 6 | Passed: 6 | Failed: 0 | Total Duration: 00d:00h:00m:01s
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

```

## Run the Sanity & Standard Tests

### Run using RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1 utility

To run all the Sanity & Standard Tests or a set of tests defined by settings file, use the `RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1` utility present in the `testframework\tests\TestSuites` directory. Using the same PowerShell window, run the below command to execute the tests:

```
# Run all the Sanity & Standard Tests
.\RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1

Example:
PS C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites> .\RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1
```

To know more about the `RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1` utility, run the `Get-Help` command as below:

```
Get-help .\RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1 -Detailed
Example:
PS C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites> Get-help .\RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1 -Detailed
```

### Run using the PQTest.exe

Use the below command in the same PowerShell window to run a particular tests directly using PQTest.exe:

```
<Path to PQText.exe> compare -p -e $Extension -pa <Replace with path to the parameter query> -q <Replace with the the path to test query>

Example:
 C:\Users\ContosoUser\.vscode\extensions\powerquery.vscode-powerquery-sdk-0.2.3-win32-x64\.nuget\Microsoft.PowerQuery.SdkTools.2.114.4\tools\PQTest.exe compare -p -e "$Extension" -pa "C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites\Contoso\ParameterQueries\Contoso.parameterquery.pq" -q "C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites\Standard\Datatypes\Cast.query.pq"

```

Please review the [PQTest docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/power-query/sdk-tools/pqtest-overview) for more information on running tests with PQTest.exe.

## Running query folding tests

The tests under any Sanity & Standard Tests can be run to validate the query folding. Run the test first time to generate additional diagnostics output file under `testframework\tests\<Extension Name>\Diagnostics\` folder. Subsequent runs will validate the output generated with the diagnostics output file.

### Run query folding tests using RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1 utility

```
// Validate Query folding the Sanity & Standard Tests
.\RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1 -ValidateQueryFolding

Example:
PS C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites> .\RunPQSDKTestSuites.ps1 -ValidateQueryFolding
```
Note: Alternatively, specify `ValidateQueryFolding=True` in the   `testframework\tests\TestSuite\RunPQSDKTestSuitesSettings.json` file.

### Run query folding tests using the PQTest.exe

```
<Path to PQText.exe> compare -p -e $Extension -pa <Replace with path to the parameter query> -q <Replace with the the path to test query> -dfp <Replace with path to the diagnostic output file>

Example:
 C:\Users\ContosoUser\.vscode\extensions\powerquery.vscode-powerquery-sdk-0.2.3-win32-x64\.nuget\Microsoft.PowerQuery.SdkTools.2.114.4\tools\PQTest.exe compare -p -e "$Extension" -pa "C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites\ParameterQueries\Contoso\Contoso.parameterquery.pq" -q "C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites\Standard\Datatypes\Cast.query.pq" -dfp "C:\dev\DataConnectors\testframework\tests\TestSuites\Contoso\Diagnostics"

```

## Creating custom tests

Below are sample instructions on how custom tests can be added:
- Create a `Custom` folder under `testframework\tests\TestSuites`.
- Create a PQ file with the M Query that needs to be tested and place it in the `Custom` directory.
- Create a settings file `CustomSettings.json` under `testframework\tests\ConnectorConfigs\<Connector Name>\Settings` folder. Add the paths for test folder `"QueryFilePath": "TestSuites/Custom"` and the parameter query file `"ParameterQueryFilePath": "ParameterQueries/<Connector Name>/<Connector Name>.parameterquery.pq"` in it.
- Run the test first time to generate the PQOut output file.
- Subsequent runs will validate the output generated with the PQOut output file.
- Please review the documentation in [PQTest docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/power-query/sdk-tools/pqtest-overview) for more information on creating new tests using the compare command.

## Known Test Variations Across Connectors

The Standard test suite ships with pre-computed `.pqout` output files that represent expected results for a reference connector. Some tests may produce different results on your connector due to differences in how the underlying data source handles certain operations. These are not bugs in the tests. They reflect genuine behavioral differences across database backends.

When testing your own connector, the recommended approach is to use the shipped `.pqout` baselines. This ensures your connector is validated against the same expected output used across all connectors. If certain tests fail due to genuine differences in how your data source handles specific operations, you can handle those on a case-by-case basis:

1. **Use the shipped baselines (recommended).** Run the tests using the pre-computed `.pqout` files included in this repository. Most tests should pass as-is. If a test fails, investigate whether the failure points to a connector bug that needs to be fixed. You can temporarily exclude failing tests using `TestFilters` in your settings file while you work on a fix. Prefix the test path with `!` to exclude it:

    ```json
    "TestFilters": [
        "!Datatypes/Int32FromDateTime.query.pq",
        "!Math/ValueFunctions_DivideDecimalPrecision.query.pq"
    ]
    ```

    Once the fix is in place, remove the filter so the test runs against the shipped baseline again.

2. **Generate your own baselines for specific tests.** If a test fails due to a genuine behavioral difference in your data source (see [Categories of Known Variations](#categories-of-known-variations) below), you can delete the shipped `.pqout` file for that specific test and run it once to generate a new baseline based on your connector's actual output. Only do this for tests where the difference is well understood. Avoid deleting all `.pqout` files at once, as this removes the value of validating against the standard test suite.

### How to Diagnose a Test Failure

When a test fails, compare the actual connector output (`SerializedSource`) against the `.pqout` file (expected output). If the values are structurally correct but differ in precision, offset, or representation, the failure likely falls into one of the categories below.

### Categories of Known Variations

#### 1. Datatype Conversion

The `Datatypes/` folder contains tests that validate type conversion functions like `Int32.From`, `Int64.From`, and `Decimal.From`. These tests verify that the connector correctly folds M type conversions to the equivalent SQL CAST operations. Most of these tests pass across all backends. However, a few conversions rely on M-specific behavior that databases may not replicate:

- **DateTime to integer**: The M engine converts a datetime to a numeric date serial value (days since 1899-12-30). This is specific to Power Query and most databases do not produce the same numeric result when casting a datetime to an integer.
- **Boolean to integer**: `Int32.From(true)` expects `1`. Some databases do not support casting a boolean directly to an integer.
- **Rounding modes**: `Int32.From(1.63, null, RoundingMode.Down)` expects `1`. When folded to SQL, the database applies its own CAST or ROUND behavior, which may produce a different result.

**How to spot it:** The test name contains `From` under the `Datatypes/` folder and the actual value differs from the expected value.

**Examples:** `Int32FromDateTime`, `Int32FromLogical`, `Int32FromNumberRoundDown`

#### 2. Floating-Point and Arithmetic Precision

Arithmetic with `Precision.Decimal` or `Precision.Double` can produce values that differ at the last few decimal places. This is due to differences in native type mappings and intermediate computation precision across backends. Statistical aggregations such as `List.Average` and `List.StandardDeviation` can also be affected.

**How to spot it:** The actual and expected values are very close but differ in the last one or two decimal digits. This is common for tests under the `Math/` and `GroupBy/` folders.

**Examples:** `ValueFunctions_DivideDecimalPrecision`, `FoldListStandardDeviation`, `GroupByWithListAverage`

#### 3. DateTime Arithmetic and Duration Operations

Some datetime operations involve M-specific behavior that not all backends support natively:

- **Datetime subtraction**: Subtracting one datetime from another produces an M `#duration` value. Some backends represent the difference as an interval or numeric value that does not map cleanly back to `#duration`.
- **Adding complex durations**: Adding a multi-component `#duration` (for example, 1 day, 1 hour, 1 minute, and 1.25 seconds) to a datetime requires the backend to handle each component. Some backends truncate fractional seconds or do not support adding compound intervals in a single operation.
- **Adding durations to a date**: Adding a `#duration` to a `date` value (not a `datetime`) is M-specific. The M engine absorbs sub-day components and returns a `date`, but some backends promote the result to a `datetime` or handle it differently.

Note that simpler operations should pass on any correctly-folded connector. If `Date.AddDays` on a datetime strips the time component, or if `Time.Hour` / `Time.Minute` / `Time.Second` return incorrect values, those failures likely point to a connector folding bug rather than a backend variation.

**How to spot it:** The test involves datetime subtraction, complex duration addition, or adding a duration to a date-typed column, and the result has a different format or type than expected.

**Examples:** `DateTimeArithmetic`, `DateTimeAddDuration`, `DateAddDuration`

#### 4. Text Edge Cases

Text functions with unusual parameters may behave differently across backends. For example, `Text.Middle` with a negative length expects an empty string in M, but some backends may return an error or a non-empty result.

**How to spot it:** The test uses an edge-case parameter value for a text function and the result differs from the expected baseline.

**Examples:** `TextMiddleWithNegativeLength`

> **Note:** If a test produces unexpected results that do not match any of the categories above, it may indicate a genuine connector bug rather than a backend variation.
